the capital Beltway the Atlanta
Perimeter the Hampton Roads Beltway
among many others ever since travel by
roadway was a thing ring roads have been
there right along with them not even
just here in the Americas but one can
find ring roads all over the world and
Europe in Asia in Africa and even
Australia ring roads seem to be an
integral part of the roadway network of
many major cities around the world Cairo
Rome Moscow Beijing
and seemingly every city in Texas along
with many many more but why why do so
many cities love building Ring roads
what is their purpose are there a good
thing or are they bad for traffic flow
in fact many cities that were unable to
build full ring roads due to Geographic
or developmental constraints have still
attempted to build partial ring roads
around their cities on this video we're
going to take a look at them so let's go
ahead and get into it first off what is
a ringr
at the core the simplest definition of a
Ring Road is one that goes around the
core of a city and allows traffic to
avoid the city center effectively a ring
around the city by this definition a
Ring Road does not necessarily need to
be an interstate highway or controlled
access freeway but a surface roadway can
also qualify as a Ring Road the roadway
doesn't have to be a normal circular
shaped route either as you can see in
many locations the Ring Road might have
an irregular shape due to some sort of
geographical constraint or an effort to
bypass existing developed areas here in
the United States ring rows are a
relatively modern thing in the early
20th century most rows just went
directly to and through City centers
then around the 1940s bypass routes
started to become more popular you can
still see the evidence of this era in
many cities with the US Highway System
specifically in cities without
Interstate access for example in Co
pepper Virginia you have us15 business
which was the original Highway through
the city a later bypass route was built
to the east that is now us5 Bypass or up
in kalamazo Michigan we can see where
the original US 131 was and what is now
US 131 business and a bypass route later
constructed to the West so up until that
point you could find bypass routes
around tons of American cities both
large and small around the 1960s as the
interstates were being built full ring
roads began becoming more popular
several major cities around the country
were slated to have full ring roads
often called belt WS or belt lines as we
can see some did get their belt WS as
originally planned while some couldn't
quite get done other cities that grew to
become larger cities later decided to
build a ring road or are still in the
process of trying to build a complete
one a good example being the recently
completed Greensboro Urban loop around
that city in North Carolina while some
others decided or tried to build
multiple ring roads around the core City
Houston Texas is noted for having two
full ring roads and a third nearly
completed one as a far outer loop but
those are just some of the interstate
level ring roads you can also find ring
roads around several cities in the
country that that aren't controlled
access places like Dothan Alabama where
Ross Clark Circle is a Surface arterior
route rather than a freeway and while
Houston has three freeway Loops Texas is
notable for the number of cities that
also have surface artillary Loops
similar to the one seen in Dothan Tyler
aene Paris and many more can be found in
lar State now that we have a little
background info on ring roads let's talk
about some of the benefits of them the
biggest benefit of ring roads and the
reason that they're usually built is to
disp traffic to understand this let's
take a look at Indianapolis Indiana
which has a full Beltway known as
Interstate 465 looking at the map here
we can see that four interstate highways
cross in the area I65 I69 I70 and I74
I65 and I70 intersect inside the Beltway
while I74 and I69 run concurrently with
it until reaching the other side of the
city by i465 existing through traffic
that will otherwise enter into the cor
City the most densely populated part of
the Metro can instead travel around the
city through less dense parts of the
metro area reducing the overall traffic
burden on the core City and instead
redirecting it to Suburban areas to go a
step further some areas such as Atlanta
prohibit large trucks from entering
inside the Beltway unless it is for
local deliveries this further increases
mobility in the core city as larger
Vehicles mixing with cars usually
generates even more slowdown and
congestion if you look at the old bypass
style routes which simply provided a
mostly parallel route for the main
highways through traffic to avoid the
city the Ring Road is like a
supercharged version of that you can
think of a Ring Road as a sort of force
field around the city as all roads
converge towards the center a bit of
traffic is peeled off at the Ring Road
and instead travels around it reducing
the overall traffic burden on the core
City the effectiveness of a Ring Road as
far as a viable bypass for a particular
route is not always guaranteed however
for example in Denver I25 is the main
north south route through the metro area
while C470 and e47 function as parts of
a ringroad around the city however due
to how far out E470 swings to the east
it never really is a viable alternative
for I25 through traffic that wishes to
avoid the core city of Denver even in
traffic it's almost always faster to
just use I25 not to mention E470 being a
toll road another benefit of ringroad is
the mobility and connectivity for
outlying areas of a metro area most
ringroad are located in Metro areas that
have a traditional concentric layout a
more dense Urban developed core City
with lower density and mostly sprawling
areas in outlining parts of the city and
suburbs the Ring Road provides
connectivity between these Suburban
areas allowing for easier trip between
them in the absence of the Ring Road in
many cases drivers would use the
mainline interstates to go into the City
and back out to the next suburban area
over good example of this is when I
lived in Charlotte before Interstate 485
was completed if you wanted to go from
the university area to the north lake or
Lake Norman area you would take I 85
Southbound towards downtown and they get
on I77 Northbound to head back up to
Lake Norman which further adds traffic
to the coral City that will otherwise
just stay in the suburbs for a more
interesting case of where this still
occurs we can look at Atlanta Atlanta
actually does have a ring Road known as
the I 285 perimeter however the metro
area has sprawled so far north that its
developed area now reaches far beyond
the old perimeter Highway as a result if
one wants to travel between Atlanta's
Northern suburbs it can often be faster
to drive south to the perimeter and back
up north to the Suburban City you were
trying to reach then of course this adds
more unnecessary burden onto the
perimeter Highway when an area has grown
as far beyond this original Ring Road as
Atlanta an additional Ring Road would be
the most effective at dispersing traffic
as the old Ring Road becomes more of a
route for local traffic traveling within
the Metro than dispersing traffic around
it Metro areas such as Houston and
Raleigh Durham have built multiple ring
roads for this reason surface arterial
type ring roads are most often used for
that purpose Loop 323 in tler Texas is a
good example of this the area around the
loop is almost entirely developed and it
has plenty of traffic lights so Loop 323
ends up functioning as a ringroad for
connectivity between outer parts of
Tyler rather than a bypass route for
dispersing traffic the minor dispersion
can still somewhat occur so we have all
these reasons to love ring roads but of
course I have to also give you the bad
the biggest criticism around ring roads
are new development and sprawl now
depending on who you ask that can
actually be a good thing new development
means more tax revenue for local
municipalities but critics of rain roads
will say it's the type of development
that it brings since ring Grows by
Nature typically run through outer less
developed parts of the metro area they
are usually accompanied by low density
sprawling types of development think
large subdivisions clde sacks and
winding residential roads with all your
favorite big boxes and other retail
found next to the Ring Road itself ring
roads are where you are usually
guaranteed to find your targets Walmarts
Home Depot cost Cod and such with large
parking lots filled to the brim with
SUVs driven by good old American soccer
m the American dream if you will also
take a look at your home metro area I
can almost guarantee that most of the
prominent shopping malls in the area are
within close proximity to the Ring Road
or bypass Highway around the city in
Charlotte there are five malls in or
next to the city limits and all but one
of them is along against Ring Road
Interstate 485 very rarely will you find
any dents or walkable neighborhoods near
these ring roads so if you're looking
for density ring roads do the opposite
they are major Catalyst for inducing
Suburbia around your city and Americans
do love their suburbs but for critics of
suburbs ring roads can be a problem and
even then sometimes it's not just the
Suburban style of development it's the
development period there are and have
been some cases where smaller towns
simply do not want the Ring Road to
bring any changes to their area another
downside of some ring roads is that they
do not perform their original purpose of
dispersing through traffic around the
core City at least not effectively there
can be many reasons for this one is the
number of exits one way for ringroad to
perform effectively as a bypass route is
to limit the number of exits if you look
at most congestion Along American
highways it is not necessarily a case of
overall capacity but instead poorly
placed or designed interchanges that
result in large amounts of weaving from
traffic entering and exiting the roadway
a good example of a roadway with several
poorly placed interchanges is Interstate
25 and Denver in Denver I25 just west of
downtown between us 85 and I70 is
riddled with several interchanges and
major arterials merging into it one
after another as a result you'll often
see traffic backed up onto the main
roadway from people attempting to leave
the highway weaving with all the roads
trying to merge into the highway so I25
in this part of the city ends up being
congested all throughout the day even
Beyond peak hours and though I25 is not
a Ring Road itself when ring roads are
designed poorly like I25 and Denver they
end up slowing down longdistance traffic
and can end up being just as congested
as the routes that go into the core City
and this is usually because developers
want as easy access to the Ring Road as
possible and most cities are not going
to turn down the possibility of new
Revenue another cause for ring RADS not
serving as good bypasses can be the
themselves when the ringroad swings too
far from the city or has a very
irregular shape it can be faster in many
cases to just use the main Highway
through the city for this week can look
at Interstate 275 in Cincinnati the
longest interstate Beltway in the
country in Cincinnati the biggest
bottlenecks and congestion lie along
Interstate 75 and despite I275 existing
as a Ring Road it simply swings too far
out of the way for anyone using I75 to
ever consider it as a bypass and the
same goes for i71 in the area so I275
ends up up mostly serving Suburban
commuters and other local traffic most
longdistance traffic will travel along
i71 and I75 directly through the city
instead and the last thing that reduces
ring Row's Effectiveness as bypasses can
be when they are too close to the core
City a good example of this is
Interstate 440 in Raleigh North Carolina
I 440 R originally constructed was a
decent bypass to get traffic around
Raleigh whose ultimate destination was
elsewhere and back there Raleigh was a
sleepy small capital city but as the
metro area has boomed in recent decades
I 440 has become just another local
Highway the city has outgrown the
Beltway in all directions especially to
the north now North Carolina did
recognize this early on and a new outer
ringroad known as i54 is under
construction and almost completed today
now with the purpose and disadvantages
of ring roads understood some State dos
have implemented measures to try and
minimize those disadvantages one common
measure is tolls when the Ring Road is
told it can discourage or slow down the
sprawl that might come if it were a free
roadway usually motorists will avoid a
toll road unless it provides a
significant travel time advantage over
the Alternatives this effectively
reduces the amount of local traffic
using the Ring Road and keeps it as more
of a roadway for long distance traffic a
good example of this is Texas 130 in
Austin if I'm traveling locally around
the Austin area then I'm likely going to
avoid using Texas 130 but if Austin is
simply a place in the way for me getting
to a further destination like San
Antonio or the DFW it might be Ben
official to use Texas 130 to avoid I35
through the city and Texas 130 has very
little spraw or development near it at
least for now other measure to keep a
Ring Road as a more functional bypass is
to limit the number of exits the biggest
Catalyst for development is access so it
is rare to see large amounts of
development near a highway if there's no
Interchange to access it limiting the
number of interchanges also prevents
bottlenecks caused by too much merging
traffic making the ringroad far more
effective at moving longdistance traffic
now most ring RADS in the US don't limit
the number of exits because everyone
wants an interchange close to them but a
good example of a highway with limited
exits is the New Jersey Turnpike it bins
both tolls and limited exits to quickly
move traffic along the most busy roadway
in the country and into the massive New
York City metro area and does a pretty
good job of it but officials do have to
be careful when using tolls on ring
roads ultimately the Ring Road is still
competing with the existing routes
through the city for travelers so if
that ring road is not significantly
faster than the through route then many
would avoid the to Ring Road for the
free direct route and then going back to
auson this is one of the issues that
plagues Texas 130 as it is sometimes
only marginally better than I35 or the
tolls are too high to be worth it to
most people but this can be offset by
using something called Dynamic pricing
where the cost of the toll road adjust
depending on the congestion the tolls
are priced low enough to encourage use
of the Ring Road but not high enough to
where motorists will prefer the main
roadway through the city but the problem
comes into play when private entities
own some of these toll roads and the
goal is profit rather than actually
improving traffic flow and now that we
know all about Ring roads let's briefly
take a look at some failed attempts at
building them in the US and what the
effect has been first was we'll start
with Atlanta since you guys know I just
love talking about Atlanta earlier I
mentioned Atlanta as a good example of a
second ring Road being needed well the
officials in Georgia seem to agree in
the Atlanta area and Outer Perimeter
Highway has been proposed and attempted
over the years multiple times initial
proposals call for a full Outer
Perimeter around the area similar to the
Sam Houston Tollway in Texas the
proposed perimeter would have roughly
followed this Corridor connecting the
Ci's numerous Northern Suburban areas
proposals for set out of perimeter were
discussed as far back as the 1960s but
it wasn't until the 1990s that the state
began making attempts at its
construction by turn to the Millennium
Atlanta had grown in numerous suburbs
exploded north of the city at this point
the building of such a roadway faced
large amounts of resistance from people
both inside and outside of the perimeter
as well as environmentalists a scale
down Northern Arc was also proposed but
suburban kns north of Atlanta also
opposed this measure no surprise there
and as of today you can see Georgia DOT
making incremental improvements and
widening to Georgia 20 like a sort of
scale down Northern Arc if we look at
Atlanta here in 2024 we see that despite
not building the ID of perimeter the
sprawl came anyway and it continues to
come in droves single family homes culde
saacs and big box stores continue to pop
up north of Atlanta even now people as
far north as fory County complain of
growth and traffic issues facing the
area as far as roads in the area it is
some of the most poorly planned and
designed that I've seen the cities and
towns up here look like they just let
the developers do whatever they want
with no real strategy or long-term
thinking as far as Mobility another fail
ATT attempt at building the greine road
was in the nation's capital of
Washington DC the metro area commonly
known as the DMV everyone knows about
the I 495 Capital Beltway but there was
actually once a proposed outer Beltway
in the DC area as far back as the 1960s
there was a proposal for this outer
Beltway said Beltway would have passed
north of Rockville on the Maryland side
and included a new bridge over the pic
River a common bottleneck today on the
existing Beltway as all traffic between
Montgomery and Fairfax counties must
drive down to the Beltway to cross
between them due to overwhelming
resistance this Beltway was never
constructed however on the Maryland side
you can see part of the route was built
as Maryland 200 so un like Atlanta DC
did get a part of its outer Beltway
built Maryland 200 connects I95 and I
270 North of the current Beltway and is
toll so it has been somewhat effective
at reducing Travel section of the
current Beltway that are parallels
though I could see it being far more
effective if it were extended out to
us50 and Prince George's County as most
traffic in the DC area travels east to
west the southeast portion between us50
and I95 doesn't seem that it would have
been very effective at dispersing
traffic and would have instead been used
for local travel so they could probably
do without that part Virginia and
Maryland plans occasionally call for
some parts of the outer Beltway
alignment to be built but as of today
nothing has come from it all right guys
that's everything on rain roads what
they are some of the advantages some of
the
disadvantages overall I probably say
they're a net
positive the only real downside is the
sprawl but even then that can kind of
vary because if you look at Charlotte
North Carolina and South Charlotte the
area just exploded when they built
Interstate 45 in that area but in the
case of DC and Atlanta when they did not
build those out of
perimeters well they sprawled anyway so
it can kind of go either
way but let me know what you guys think
that's all I got and I will see you on
the next one for